We'll motion public session.
Uh, good to have you here. I'm Sam
Dale, chair of the health committee.
Thank you for coming back.
You know, the members around the table.
Um, we have you here, um, for 10 minutes,
but we do have a bit more time
after that, so I might let that run a little bit longer.
If members have questions, um, I'll open it up to,
to members Laisha Vel.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. Thanks, commissioner for coming back.
Um, I'll pick up some of the questions that we, uh, had
after our last hearing.
Uh, the handing over of the advanced care planning
and I improve, um,
and improving together education program,
health New Zealand, as well as programs
and infection control and mental health zero seclusions.
Are you confident
that those programs will continue at the same
or greater scale
and they currently are
with the handover to Health New Zealand?
Uh, I really can't answer a firm yes or no to that
because we don't, we don't know
is probably the honest answer.
We are very keen to ensure that that happens
and doing everything that we can.
Um, but I think you'd need to talk to Health New Zealand
around what we're doing with them.
Are you aware of any of the impacts
of the staff reductions and the quality
and area in Health New Zealand on those programs?
On those programs? Yes. No.
Uh, the changes to the consumer, um,
consumer and whanau voice program
that you referenced last time, the impact of change
that is happening.
Can you describe the change
that is happening at Health New Zealand with respect
to the consumer and pharma voice?
Uh, I can only describe from the point of view of
what we've heard, um, from consumers, uh, who work for,
as part of us or with us
or, um, within our sort of, uh, context.
And what we're hearing is some degree of concern
by consumers that some of the previous, um, things
that were in place such as consumer councils, you know,
various ways in which consumers engaged, uh, were
for a while looking pretty shaky.
Uh, and in some places not there.
Uh, what we've heard is
that there has been some
improvement at the last board meeting.
The consumers were saying it's getting better in some
places, but I can't be more specific than that.
Thank you. Uh, you
and I had some, uh, discussion about mortality statistics,
uh, at the last hearing.
Can you please explain, uh, in concrete terms what the,
um, national Mortality review, uh,
framework is from here and how report
Occur? Um,
I'll do my best,
and if I need to, I'll ask, uh, Don Matheson,
who looks at the heads program
for the commission to join in.
But, uh, my understanding is that we are trying to move to,
uh, much more to a different model whereby we are not
issuing, uh, regular lengthy reports that rely on data
that may be a few years old.
Uh, we are moving towards trying to have closer
to not real time
because we obviously have
to rely on things like coronial hearings and so forth,
but closer to more immediate information
and to putting it out in different forms.
Uh, we are also moving
because we have had a very variable response
to recommendations over many years.
We are moving to engage much more closely from an
earlier level.
So at the point of making draft recommendations with those
who have the power to then implement those recommendations.
So you'll see we've given a couple of examples in the papers
around the perioperative work
and also around sudi where we are engaging early, uh,
through the committee with those
that actually have the power to action things
and trying to actually get some real traction in that area.
Do you wanna add anything, Don? Uh, no.
Just, uh, there that,
That's all right. And excuse
Me. That's fine. Matheson.
Um, I actually wanna take
that in a different direction
because you've adequately answered that the, um, uh,
reporting and analysis of deaths is one
of the most important signals we can get on the, on, um,
poor quality care with, you know,
the worst outcome for people.
So, uh, while I appreciate that, it's, it's really good
to intervene early and to make sure, uh,
you also say in the papers, you're putting information on
the website, writing a detailed report involves a level
of synthesis and analysis of those things
that dumping it on the internet does not.
So can you please say where that level
of analysis will happen on important things like
perioperative and maternal deaths?
Um, I, I'm not here,
but my understanding is there will still be reports
where there need to be, but I think it's a little unfair
with respect to categorize it also as saying
that we're just gonna dump it on
the internet now, because can
You explain how you're gonna do the analysis
and, uh, uh, regular reporting, um, other than just,
uh, publishing the numbers on, say,
shiny apps on the, on the internet?
Where's that analysis
and reflection on what's going on in the system?
It lies beneath it. It's there, it's happening anyway.
That's why the committee is in place so that we can do
that analysis with the various
expert groups that it works with.
So for each of the areas that we work,
we have subject matter experts, uh,
and if we take perioperative mortality, uh,
currently we're engaging with URA about how
to form a joint group.
Uh, so our analysis
and data, uh, puts up signals
that there may be issues to be dealt with.
Previously, we would have produced a recommendation
and hope that recommendation would be taken up.
What we are moving to is joint problem solving with them.
On the one hand, maintaining our independence
so we can talk about what the data's saying,
and, uh, both the, the numbers,
but also the committee's very keen,
what do the numbers mean?
Our issue isn't lack of data, as you point out,
our issues come later in the process about how data is used
and how it's used in decision making.
So that's the, uh, and to do that, we need both the data
and the deeper analysis.
Now, if we take, uh, this year, we are looking at
treatable mortality.
In other words, those treatments, uh, where, which,
which people and which populations, uh, um, uh,
have a higher mortality because of their,
or related to their access to quality healthcare.
And we're honing in on cardiovascular disease and that,
but we have an expert group, just as we did in the past,
looking at these issues, uh, looking at, you know, what lies
behind them, uh, trying to understand causation.
So there's no, um, there's no suggestion
that we are moving away from using the expertise in the
sector, uh, to try and tackle these issues.
Mr. Chairman, I may just two more questions and
Minute. I'm gonna jump
on here. Okay.
We're running outta time, and other members have questions.
I noted that around, um, the maternity rep said that, um,
650 babies and 10 mothers die in pregnancy
or shortly afterwards, each year,
and there's been no improvement for, well, since 20 2007.
Mm-hmm. Uh, why has there been no improvement? Those stats?
Shouldn't there be an area
where we're reducing mortality rates?
They should be, and as a result, we called together, uh,
all of the various key people late last year.
Uh, health New Zealand is now leading a program of work
to try and address it, address it.
But we absolutely agree with you.
It's, I mean, that should not be the case,
and we need to do something about it,
But it's effectively, so they put in a
program of work last year,
Uh, the meeting was late last year,
and the program of work is underway.
As I understand it, I'm looking at,
Yeah, there's a national quality forum. There's
A big gap there, though. Yes.
From 2007 until to 24, until
work begins on this,
Uh, uh, in terms of the, uh,
the commission's work on mortality, um, uh,
we, uh, related to maternal
and perinatal, we've produced 16 reports, uh,
and some 140 recommendations.
Um, the problem isn't understanding from our point of view
what the nature of the problem is.
The problem is how do we get action in a sector
and to, to, to approach the issues of maternal mortality.
The number one issue is maternal suicide, in fact. Yes.
Um, uh, as well as, um, you know, a,
a range of other issues.
So the, what happened is that the commission then
supported a sector-wide discussion on maternity,
uh, and through the work of the National Quality Forum,
where, uh, we, we, um, facilitate parts
of the sector coming together, uh,
to progress these issues. So
I'll just jump in there. Are
you saying that the recommendations
and papers that you've written are not being,
have not been acted on over the previous two
Decades? Decades? It, it gets back to,
you know, the,
what we were discussing with Dr.
Vel, there has been variable uptake
and part of the issue has been,
there have been large reports, lots of recommendations,
and many of them have not been implemented.
Our, our role is, I mean, we only have the power to try
and influence and lead.
Uh, and so that's why we're trying
to change the approach in a number of areas
with this mortality review work to get early attraction
and make sure that things do happen.
And that's a great, I mean,
it's an awful example, but it is an example.
Point one think Asha. Yeah.
Um, health New Zealand gets, sorry.
Um, health Quality Safety Commission
mortality data from the local level
and mortality review information.
Yes. Can you describe any changes in the quantity
or nature of that review information
that you are receiving recently?
It comes from a variety of sources, um,
including coronial inquiries.
So there's often a lag with some of it.
And we are, I know increasingly trying to use some
of the preliminary data rather than waiting, for instance,
till the end of inquest and things like that.
But Don might like to add to
That. Yeah, there's been
a 10 year decline in the number
of local mortality review undertaken at the district level.
Um, and, uh, we are currently working with, um,
health New Zealand, uh, uh, to look at ways in which we can,
uh, work with them, uh,
because fundamentally it's within, uh,
health New Zealand. So it's,
What's the scale of that decline, please?
Pardon? What's the scale,
What's the scale like?
Has it halved over the 10 years?
Uh, well, there's between five
and 600 deaths of, um, uh, children
and youth, uh, per year.
Uh, around 2010, uh,
there was an excess of 300.
I could give you the exact figures if I look them up at 300
plus local mortality reviews done
in the last couple of years.
Although, uh, as, um, Ray says we have to wait two
or three years before all the information's available.
But what we can see is a very substantial decline
in local mortality review activity.
And just a point of clarification, Don, you mentioned the,
um, child and youth deaths,
but am I correct in, I, I understand why children
and youth dying would get a review more frequently,
but wouldn't this apply to all deaths that occur
and, um, that are unusual
or, um, concerning to the clinicians involved?
Yeah, so when we are looking at mortality review,
we're not the front line of the review processes.
There's several other review processes going on
within the institution. What,
What is it that's getting reported to you is
My question. I'm gonna go to
one last question from the opposition
and then I'm gonna move over to Carlos and
Scott. Can you clarify
what gets reported to you?
Well, we get all the information about, um,
local review activity, local mortality review activity.
In fact, we, we house their information, uh, system
and a system that in terms of perinatal mortality,
uh, we administer a, not administer,
but we have a questionnaire that goes to, uh, to the,
uh, clinical units involved.
And the response rate we have from that is very high.
If I go back to 2023,
because we take a number of years, there was some 680,
uh, babies lost in Perina in that, uh, in,
in the perinatal period.
And, um, I think was, there's only 10
of which we haven't had a completed, uh, uh,
report from the districts about, uh,
what may have happened. Um,
I'm gonna jump in there 'cause we're very
short on time. Carlos,
Thank you for coming.
I just want to go back to your impatient survey. Yes.
Um, I can see that on, um, for the past 12 months.
The higher scope for the survey is about the, uh,
understanding the possible side effect
of medicine they left the hospital with or,
or understand, uh,
what the help they need when they left the hospital.
But on the other side,
the lower score is pretty much on the same thing.
But, um, they understanding, they told by the GP
and nurse clinic or pharmacy what
to do when they experience side effect.
Like what, what causing the difference
because they have pretty much the same thing,
but one in the hospital and one in the GP clinic or nursing.
Is it, is it a different approach being implemented?
They may be. I mean, there'll
be different people potentially.
'cause they're different surveys. We do one
that's out in the community, which is the pharmacy stuff,
and we do one in the hospital.
But I will ask Richard Hamlin to come
and join us to see if he can, uh, assist you more.
Richard? Yeah,
Thank you.
Richard is the director
of our quality intelligence, so he knows all the numbers.
Uh, sorry, can I just check again with you, Carlos?
Uh, Mr. Uh, the, uh, um, page
18. Page 18.
Yes.
Uh, so if you're on the top, you can see the,
the highest score as on the, um, the,
the possible side effect.
They understand where they left the hospital,
but at the same side on, on the middle
of the, the, the, the patient.
18, you also, the lower score is also the similar thing,
but they happen in GP clinic and pharmacy. So
I, I think there may be misunderstanding.
Uh, they take your pointed starts on page 17
and it's actually the lowest score in a hospital as well.
So the two are a similar sort of thing, which
Ah, yes. Oh yeah.
So what, so how can we address that?
How do we address this? I mean, this is an interesting one
because, uh, these have historically been lower
and they actually, uh, questions
that have improved over time.
So we're seeing probably a 10
or 15% improvement in people responding to these over time.
I think, uh, the major pieces of work
that have been done here have been around ideas
around health literacy, uh, around, um,
communication, patient involvement, those sorts of skills.
So if you look at a lot of the work
that our partners in care, um, uh,
program did over the last 10 years, a lot of it was about
how do you communicate better?
How do you involve patients in their care better?
And that's the sort of thing that ultimately leads
to a better understanding of medication, uh, and its uses
and risks upon, uh, leaving hospital
or, you know, while you are in the community.
So those are the things I would really point to
that probably actually have already led
to improvements. So more of the same. I think
We feed you information. I jump
Everyone. We we're, we're
at time, we're over time.
Um, so I know other members had questions,
but we are where we are.
But I wanna say thank you for coming on here today
and, um, submit, you know, making yourself available
to the committee and answering questions.
Thank you. Thank you.
Thanks very much for coming back. Thank you. Mm-hmm.
Here, we've got you in here for 10 minutes.
You ask questions, um, on the report of the ombudsman.
Thank you for making yourself available.
Uh, we're in public session. I'll open it up to members.
Do they have any questions? Uh, Hamish.
Excellent. Um, thank, thank you for coming in
and thank you for providing the information.
You do, uh, have, um, I see, um, there's been a number
of OIA requests, um, in six months.
Um, do you have a breakdown
of whether those are private individuals, um,
journalists or what sector they're coming from?
Do you collect any information on that? We
Will have some categorization.
I'll just check with Oliver, who's with me about, and,
and you know, by all means, we can provide that
to the committee if you'd like further information.
Uh, so breakdown all that we've got around the,
So we, We do carry a breakdown.
So you have industry, uh, members of the public,
pharmaceutical, um, and media,
but we'll have to get those numbers to you front hearing.
Happy to provide that And good.
Um, being a user of oas, a lot
of organizations have a free
and think advice, um, exception for redaction
in your organization.
What's your expectation
after a certain period of time in terms of then saying
that the public interest outweighs that?
Um, because there doesn't seem to be a co a sort of, um,
universal view on that.
And I'm interested to see whether you have an expectation
that certain events such as the passing of a budget
or so on would then make that, uh,
information fairly belong in the public
Interest. Is that your understanding?
Yeah, that's correct. And it, it, it's a case
by case basis, depending of course, as you say,
if it's something that's already effectively been either
surpassed or is, um, elements of it in the public arena,
then we consider it in that light.
So we don't, we don't have a hard and fast rule,
but you know, we, we try
and approach the spirit of the act, um,
and comply with it in that sense.
Okay. Can we go into
how you are seeing free
and frank be interpreted in
the health agencies under consideration
and, um, how that, how
that aligns with your, um, with best practice?
I mean, I can, I can only speak for P Act
because I'm obviously not privy
to what's happening in the other health agencies.
Um, I, I mean, my own view in what I observe is
that it's predominantly in the policy advice Space Farm's
not a policy advice ministry.
Uh, that's obviously the Ministry of Health that, uh, uh,
provides that advice.
So to be honest, that Free
and Frank is, is usually
in our sense, less relevant.
What is more relevant for us as commercial considerations
and, and materials that we are asked for information about.
Clearly, you know, anything that's relating to contracts
and pricing, you know, is,
is non-negotiable as a commercial.
So the free and frank policy advice, to be honest, is,
is not really an issue
or very, very rarely an issue with farming.
Thanks. Any other questions from members?
Well then, right?
I, I'll go for one.
Um, so mean we read a lot of concerns
around how how OIA are, are sent
and, um, often people feel
that they don't get the information back that they want.
Um, have, have there been any instances within
your organization where hot topic words
or um, requests from certain individuals are then escalated
to senior management for them to oversee the distribution,
um, of information requested under the OAA?
Well, with respect to farming,
it's a pretty small organization.
It's pretty flat, so, um, you know,
oass are typically signed out
by the director of the division.
So almost automatically there's,
there's oversight in terms of content.
Um, but yeah, I mean, given the size
and scale of the place, we're not prolific, uh, the driver
of oas, but we do receive that fair share.
I would say based on the work that the Ombudsman did
and the organization's response
to it we're tracking really well in terms of being able to,
um, lift the game in terms
of alliance lifting education of the organization.
We recently had Rebecca Kittridge come in
and do an education session reminding everyone around, um,
the OIA and some of the not only obligations,
but also when things can go wrong as they do.
So, yeah, I think we're in a sound position.
Good. Uh, thank you. Thank you for that answer.
That all makes sense. Uh, Ingrid.
Yeah. Um, just on the, um, table of things
that you are doing to implement the recommendations,
I notice on page nine point 27 that extensions, there's
to be a system where you provide the
rationale of extensions.
That's right. That hasn't commenced.
Um, as somebody who, again, not talk,
talking about your organization,
but continually gets extensions from health organizations
and ministers, it does feel like an abusive process.
So this is a really important point.
I'm wondering why work isn't
commence from your organization?
Um, well, like I'm happy to report it has commenced,
it just hasn't been fully implemented, right.
This is a combination of upskilling, um, and uh,
and, and being really clear around justified rationale
for extensions sometimes.
And, and again, because we're a highly technical
organization, the extension by agreement with the requester
is to collate large amounts of technical information.
Un understood. Um, but this is about the schedule and,
and I'm just curious in why it's got not commens here.
Has this work just begun in the
Last few days? The
latest since the beginning of July. Okay. So,
Yeah. Thank you. So just
To clarify that, um, first column that you're seeing was
where we were in January.
Yeah. And so this is showing you progress from, you know,
January to the next six months. Yeah. Thank
You. So the right hand column,
current status.
Alright, so where it says current month,
Current month, It, it says fully implemented on
that points 27,
but that's not actually correct for the current month.
It's just in commencement. Is that, am I,
Oh, sorry. For point 27,
sorry. Apologies. Yes, fully implemented.
I was looking slight, slightly further down. Okay.
But as you can see, some of them are
fully, some of them are partly
Most of them. So there's no
red blocks on the
No, which really no, no red blocks. Yep.
Alright. Thank you. Alright, excellent.
In lieu of any further questions, thank you
for making yourselves available today.
Thank you. I appreciate it. Have a good day. Thank you very
Much.